`zarf bundle` ADR (#1820)
defenseunicorns/zarf: adr/0017-zarf-bundle.md

# 17. Bundles

Date: 2023-06-13

## Status

Pending

## Context

> Orchestrating capabilities from multiple Zarf packages into meta-packages is a current weakpoint for Zarf. The core of Zarf was built around components as capabilities, but as Zarf packages have scaled, there has been a need to create a new boundary to manage these capabilities efficiently.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Orchestrating capabilities from multiple Zarf packages into meta-packages is a current weak point for Zarf. The core of Zarf was built around components as capabilities, but as Zarf packages have scaled, there has been a need to create a new boundary to manage these capabilities efficiently.
```

Reviewer: i think weak point is two words, just nit picking

> Orchestrating capabilities from multiple Zarf packages into meta-packages is a current weak point for Zarf. The core of Zarf was built around components as capabilities, but as Zarf packages have scaled, there has been a need to create a new boundary to manage these capabilities efficiently.

Reviewer 2: Recommended change to this line "Orchestrating capabilities from multiple Zarf packages into a single artifact(package) for deployment is not currently supported in Zarf."

```yaml
- name: init
  required: true
  files:
    - source: zarf-init-amd64-v0.27.0.tar.zst
      target: zarf-init-amd64-v0.27.0.tar.zst
  actions:
    onDeploy:
      after:
        - cmd: zarf package deploy zarf-init-amd64-v0.27.0.tar.zst --components git-server --confirm -l warn
```

While this _does_ fulfill the need to deploy two packages in one command, it does so in such a way that is verbose within the `zarf.yaml`, brittle across Zarf versions, inefficient within the package structure (it doesn't share layers), and is difficult to use `variables` with.

### Proposed Solutions

There are currently three proposed solutions to this, each with their own pros and cons:

#### Zarf Bundle

Uses OCI and a separate Zarf schema / declarative YAML definition to pull packages into a single artifact and orchestrate them together.

Pros:

- maintains efficient OCI layering / deduping of shared package resources
- allows flexibility in defining what `zarf bundle` (or a separate command) would look like as its own command without polluting `zarf package`

Cons:

- variables set within packages with `setVariables` may be difficult to share across packages

> - package sources in bundles would be OCI _only_, and would not support local packages.

Reviewer 3: This read like we are technically incapable of using local packages when creating bundles. That is not the case.

I get that we might have a preference for not using local packages but we should be explicit and list out our reasons for not wanting to rather than just stating that bundles won't support local packages.

Reviewer 3: <3

> - package sources in bundles would be OCI _only_, and would not support local packages. (this may change in the future, but for an intial POC it would be out of scope)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- package sources in bundles would be best to keep as OCI _only_, without support for local packages. This would help us ensure there are versions for packages and would help with efficiency by taking advantage of things like layer deduping.
```

  name: omnibus
  description: an example Zarf bundle
  version: 0.0.1
  arch: amd64

packages:
  - repository: ghcr.io/defenseunicorns/packages/dubbd
    ref: 0.0.1 # OCI spec compliant reference
    # arch is not needed as it will use w/e arch is set in the bundle's metadata
    optional-components: # by default, all required components will be included
      - "*" # include all optional components
  - repository: docker.io/<namespace>/<name>
    ref: 0.0.1
    optional-components:
      - preflight
      - aws-* # include all optional components that start with "aws-"
```

Bundle would be a new top-level command in Zarf with a full compliment of sub-commands (mirroring the pattern of `zarf package`):

- `zarf bundle create <path> -o oci://<reference>|<path>`
- `zarf bundle deploy oci://<reference>|<path>`
- `zarf bundle inspect oci://<reference>|<path>`
- `zarf bundle list` --> will probably just show the same as `zarf package list`
- ~~`zarf bundle publish`~~ --> Bundles will be OCI only, so there is no need for a publish command, `create` will handle that.
- `zarf bundle pull oci://<reference> -o <dir>`
- `zarf bundle remove oci://<reference>|<path>`

## Consequences

> This does add complexity to the Zarf codebase, as it is the addition of an entire suite of commands, JSON schema, schema docs, CLI docs, and chunk of library code + tests.  It is a good litmus test of the current packager and OCI codebase to see how ready it is to be consumed as a library.

Reviewer: a chunk of..

# 17. Bundles

Date: 2023-06-13

## Status

Pending

## Context

> Orchestrating Zarf packages into meta-packages is a current weakpoint of Zarf. The core of Zarf was oriented around components as capabilities, but as Zarf packages have scaled, it has been discovered that entire packages are now rapidly becoming modularized capabilities.
> 
> Currently there is no official way to enable the deployment, publishing, pulling, and creation of these Zarf packages. Due to this shortfalling, it has led to the community developing such antipatterns as:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Orchestrating capabilities from multiple Zarf packages into meta-packages is a current weakpoint for Zarf. The core of Zarf was built around components as capabilities, but as Zarf packages have scaled, there has been a need to create a new boundary to manage these capabilities efficiently.

Currently there is no official way to enable the deployment, publishing, pulling, and creation of multiple Zarf packages together, and due to this some in the community have resorted to patterns such as:
```
A bit better wording on some of the why (efficiency) and also wanted to stray away from the "antipattern" wording since it isn't really the communities' fault that they are doing that - to me "antipattern" is something that is well communicated as something to not do which up until recently the Zarf team has not done.

```yaml
- name: init
  required: true
  files:
    - source: zarf-init-amd64-v0.27.0.tar.zst
      target: zarf-init-amd64-v0.27.0.tar.zst
  actions:
    onDeploy:
      after:
        - cmd: zarf package deploy zarf-init-amd64-v0.27.0.tar.zst --components git-server --confirm -l warn
```

> While this _does_ fulfill the need to deploy two packages in one command, it does so in such a way that is very brittle and creates bloated and inefficient packages.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
While this _does_ fulfill the need to deploy two packages in one command, it does so in such a way that is verbose within the `zarf.yaml`, brittle across Zarf versions, inefficient within the package structure (it doesn't share layers), and is difficult to use `variables` with.
```
Expanding on a few more *ilities to be considered

### Proposed Solutions

There are currently three proposed solutions to this, each with their own pros and cons:

#### Zarf Bundle

> Uses OCI and a separate zarf schema / declarative YAML definition to pull packages into a single artifact and orchestrate them together.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Uses OCI and a separate Zarf schema / declarative YAML definition to pull packages into a single artifact and orchestrate them together.
```

> Biggest problem to solve is how to handle variables and whether/how those should be shared between packages.
> 
> Package sources in bundles would be OCI _only_, and would not support local packages.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Pros:
- maintains efficient OCI layering / deduping of shared package resources
- allows flexibility in defining what `zarf bundle` (or a separate command) would look like as its own command without polluting `zarf package`

Cons:
- variables set within packages with `setVariables` may be difficult to share across packages
- package sources in bundles would be OCI _only_, and would not support local packages.
```
This is only cons and a separate pros/cons list may be easier to parse.

#### Super Zarf Packages

> Add a packages key or another way to overlay packages into a larger package with the same internal structure.
> 
> Biggest problem here is how we would scope things after layering things together such as how we might need to change Helm chart name generation or other package level things (like deployed package secrets)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Adds a packages key or another way to overlay packages into a larger package with the same internal structure as current Zarf packages.

Pros:
- packages would maintain the same syntax under `zarf package` between normal / meta packages.

Cons:
- it would be difficult to properly scope things like variables and helm chart names properly across packages.
- this continues to add to `zarf package` making it more complex and harder to test
```

#### Zarf Package Manager

> Have a separate binary pull and manage packages together - this would also likely include dependency declaration and resolution between packages.
> 
> Biggest problem is how do we define dependencies and know what is "installed" for a Zarf package.  Variable orchestration would also be an issue. The added workload of supporting an entire separate binary would also place strain on the Zarf team.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Uses a separate binary (not `zarf`) to pull and manage packages together - this would also include dependency declaration and resolution between packages.

Pros:
- this is a familiar/expressive way to solve the package problem and would be familiar to developers and system administrators
- allows flexibility in defining what the package manager would look like as its own command without polluting `zarf package`

Cons:
- dependencies may be difficult to determine whether they are "installed"/"deployed" - particularly for pre-cluster resources
- variables set within packages with `setVariables` may be difficult to share across packages
- this would necessitate a separate binary with it's own CLI that would need its own release schedule and maintenance

> :warning: **NOTE**: The package manager could also be made to be OCI-only but would come with the same OCI pros/cons.
```

Reviewer 4: Again pros+cons

## Decision

The current proposition (subject to change before acceptance) is **Zarf Bundles**, which a following PR will focus on and create a POC of.

In essense the `zarf-bundle.yaml` would look something like so:

```yaml
metadata:
  name: omnibus
  description: an example Zarf bundle
  version: 0.0.1
  arch: amd64

packages:
  - repository: ghcr.io/defenseunicorns/packages/dubbd
    ref: 0.0.1 # OCI spec compliant reference
    # arch is not needed as it will use w/e arch is set in the bundle's metadata
    components:
      - "*" # grab all components
  - repository: docker.io/<namespace>/<name>
    ref: 0.0.1

>     components:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    optionalComponents:
```
I think this should explicitly be optional components or we should add a note somewhere in the ADR that this works like the `--components` flag

      - first-component
      - another-component
```

Bundle would be a new top-level command in Zarf with a full compliment of sub-commands (mirroring the pattern of `zarf package`):

- `zarf bundle create <path> -o oci://<reference>|<path>`
- `zarf bundle deploy oci://<reference>|<path>`
- `zarf bundle inspect oci://<reference>|<path>`
- `zarf bundle list` --> will probably just show the same as `zarf package list`
- ~~`zarf bundle publish`~~ --> Bundles will be OCI only, so there is no need for a publish command, `create` will handle that.
- `zarf bundle pull oci://<reference> -o <dir>`
- `zarf bundle remove oci://<reference>|<path>`

## Consequences

This does add complexity to the Zarf codebase, as it is the addition of an entire suite of commands, JSON schema, schema docs, CLI docs, and chunk of library code + tests.  It is a good litmus test of the current packager and OCI codebase to see how ready it is to be consumed as a library.

> There is also the hard requirement that packages bundled must be first published to a registry available to the person performing the bundle operation. This removes some ability to develop bundles on an air gapped environment, but the team believes that in such scenarios, the air gapped environment should be _receiving_ a bundle, rather than developing one internal.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
There is also the hard requirement that packages bundled must be first published to a registry available to the person performing the bundle operation. This removes some ability to develop bundles on an air gapped environment, but the team believes that in such scenarios, the air gapped environment should be _receiving_ a bundle, rather than developing one internally.  If this assumption is incorrect however there are options for us to allow the creation of bundles from OCI directories on local systems if we need to or we could provide more provisions within Zarf to make it easier to connect to airgap registries to mirror bundles.
```
May be worth noting that there are things we could do to help in this scenario.
